NMS-14621: Quick Start - Visualize Data (#5353)
OpenNMS/opennms: docs/modules/operation/pages/deep-dive/admin/webui/dashboard.adoc

= Dashboard

In Network Operations Centers (NOCs), an overview of issues occurring in the network is important.
This information is often presented in customized dashboards, as appropriate for the monitored environment.
A dashboard is an at-a-glance overview of the network, and it is often used as an entry point for more detailed diagnosis of issues using data provided by {page-component-title}.

Large networks have people (operators) who have different responsibilities, according to its monitoring needs.
Each dashboard should show only the information pertaining to a specific monitoring context.
Operators need to customize and filter information on the dashboard to create focused data sets.

.Dashboard with configured surveillance view and current outage
image::dashboard/01_dashboard-overall.png[]

TIP: You can hide the upper navigation bar on any page by adding `?quiet=true;` to the end of any {page-component-title} URL.

> This is useful when viewing dashboards on a large monitor or TV screen.

Author: Hmmm... I don't think so. I think we can just shorten it to "... when viewing dashboards on a large screen" here.

```suggestion
This is useful when viewing dashboards on a large screen.
```

* *Outages:* displays all ongoing network outages.
* *Resource graphs* displays time series reports for performance diagnosis.

[[ga-dashboard-surveillance-view]]
=== Surveillance view

The surveillance view component has multiple functions:

* It lets you model the network monitoring context.
* It shows service and node outages in a compact matrix view.
* It lets you limit the information displayed in the rest of the dashboard dynamically by manually selecting rows, columns, and cells.

By default, all entries in a surveillance view are selected.
For more information on configuring the surveillance view component, see <<deep-dive/admin/webui/surveillance-view.adoc#ga-surveillance-view, Surveillance View>>.

.A surveillance view component in its default state (all entries selected)
image::dashboard/02_dashboard-surveillance-view.png[]

[[ga-dashboard-alarms]]
=== Alarms

The alarms component displays an overview of all unacknowledged alarms whose severity is higher than Normal (1).
It sorts alarms from most to least recent, and lets you scroll through the last 100 alarms.

Acknowledged alarms are removed from the operator's responsibility and, therefore, the alarms component.

> The following information is shown in the component:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The component displays the following information:
```

.An alarms component displaying three alarms--two of Minor severity, and one of Warning severity
image::dashboard/03_dashboard-alarms.png[]

> 1. *Node:* the label of the node associated with the alarm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Node:* the label of the node associated with the alarm.
```

> 2. *Severity:* severity of the alarm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Severity:* alarm severity.
```

> 3. *UEI:* the alarm's UEI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *UEI:* the alarm's UEI.
```

> 4. *Count:* the number of alarms deduplicated by the alarm's reduction key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Count:* the number of alarms deduplicated by the alarm's reduction key.
```

> 5. *Last Time:* the time at which the most recent alarm was generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Last Time:* the time at which the most recent alarm was generated.
```

> 6. *Log Msg:* the log message from the alarm's event definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Log Msg:* the log message from the alarm's event definition.
```

[[ga-dashboard-notifications]]
=== Notifications

The notifications component shows outstanding and unacknowledged notifications.
It sorts notifications from most to least recent, and lets you scroll through the last 100 notifications.

> Notifications are used to inform people on a duty schedule of issues in the monitored network, and to force action to fix or reconfigure systems immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notifications inform people on a duty schedule of issues in the monitored network, so they can take action to fix or reconfigure systems immediately.
```

> In {page-component-title}, it is possible to acknowledge notifications to designate someone as working on a specific issue.

Reviewer: This isn't quite clear. I think it means that you can designate someone as working on a specific issue as part of acknowledging a notification.

Author: I believe so, but I'd like to confirm with @mmahacek or @uquevedo.

Reviewer 2: Acknowledging a notification removes them from the everyone's view in the web UI.  If you have multiple operators logged in, one user ack'ing a notice will hide it from others so they don't see the notice active as something to address.

Author: ```suggestion
In {page-component-title}, you can acknowledge notifications to indicate that they are being worked on.
When a notification is acknowledged, it is removed from the component.
```

A dashboard should show outstanding notifications in the NOC.
This provides an overview of the monitored network and gives an opportunity for intervention.

The following information is shown in the component:

.A notifications component displaying three notifications
image::dashboard/04_dashboard-notifications.png[]

> 1. *Node:* the label of the node associated with the notification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Node:* the label of the node associated with the notification.
```

> 2. *Service:* the name of the service associated with the notification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Service:* the name of the service associated with the notification.
```

> 3. *Message:* the log message associated with the notification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Message:* the log message associated with the notification.
```

> 4. *Sent Time:* time when the notification was sent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Sent Time:* time when the notification was sent.
```

> 5. *Responder:* name of the user who acknowledged the notification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Responder:* name of the user who acknowledged the notification.
```

> 6. *Respond Time:* the time when the Responder acknowledged the notification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Respond Time:* the time when the responder acknowledged the notification.
```
I wish the UI said "response time".

Author: Same. Maybe we can review the UI language at some point?

[[ga-dashboard-node-status]]
=== Outages

The outages component shows all ongoing network outages.
An acknowledged alarm doesn't necessarily mean that an outage has been solved; for this reason, the outages component works alongside the alarms component to provide a holistic overview of the network.

.An outages component displaying five nodes and their availability stats
image::dashboard/05_dashboard-outages.png[]

> 1. *Node:* the label of the node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Node:* the label of the node.
```

> 2. *Current Outages:* the number of services on the node experiencing outages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Current Outages:* the number of services on the node experiencing outages.
```

The number of outages is listed out of the total number of monitored services (for example, "3 of 3 services are affected").

> 3. *24 Hour Availability:* the availability of all node services, calculated across the last 24 hours.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *24 Hour Availability:* the availability of all node services, calculated across the last 24 hours.
```

[[ga-dashboard-resource-graph-viewer]]
=== Resource graphs

The resource graphs component shows time series reports across a defined time range.
It also lets you navigate to time series data reports, providing a quick entry point from which to diagnose performance issues.

The component filters nodes based on the surveillance view context.
It shows only one graph report at a time, and lets you navigate sequentially through the data.

> .A resource graphs component displaying ICMP response time data from 11:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.A resource graph component displaying ICMP response time data from 11:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
```

image::dashboard/06_dashboard-resource-graphs.png[]

[[ga-dashboard-advanced-configuration]]
== Advanced configuration

The surveillance view component lets you model views for different monitoring contexts.
Using it, you can create a special view as an example for network or server operators.

> The dashboard displays only _one_ configured <<deep-dive/admin/webui/surveillance-view.adoc#ga-surveillance-view, surveillance view>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dashboard displays only one configured <<deep-dive/admin/webui/surveillance-view.adoc#ga-surveillance-view, surveillance view>>.
```

You can, however, let certain users define their surveillance view to fit their requirements by mapping their account to a configured surveillance view component.

Any nodes selected in the surveillance view are also aware of the https://opennms.discourse.group/t/user-restriction-filters-webacls/1021[User Restriction Filter].
If you have a group of users who should see only a subset of nodes, the surveillance view will filter the data appropriately.

The dashboard is designed to focus, and therefore also restrict, a user's view of monitored devices.

> To do this, a new user role was added.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this, {page-component-title} includes a dashboard user role that restricts the user to viewing only the dashboard.
```
Not sure when it was "new", so we can remove that!

> It restricts them to viewing only the dashboard, if that is the administrator's intent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
